CryptoDemo
----------
CryptoDemo is a dynamic web page that is used to provide an
interactive STEM module about basic symmetric encryption.




PERSONAL NOTES
SetSAIL - February 2021

Logistics:
40minute sessions, online, via zoom.  Expect 25 teachers per session?

Main idea:
My idea is to do an encryption module, but do it better!
Specifically, I'd like to get the secret key encryption idea across,
along with attacks and an understanding of some basic important issues
in cryptography, and I'd like to have some tie-in to the modern world,
and maybe a teaser for something else.  Finally, I'd really like to tie
in the idea of *function* in a way that hopefully expands students
understanding of what's going on.

- key size
- block-size?

- frequency analysis
- brute force
- chosen plaintext?

* English bigram and letter pair frequencies from the
  Google Corpus Data in JSON format 
  https://gist.github.com/lydell/c439049abac2c9226e53
  from http://norvig.com/mayzner.html

* Notes on historical ciphers

1. Caesar shift - used by Caesar (according to Seutonius)
   This is the goto intro to encryption for everyone.  Why?  Because
   it has strong analogies to how encryption is done today.

2. Alberti and later Vigenere ciphers
   These don't encrypt a given plaintext char with the same ciphertext
   char every time.  Big step forward. Vigenere is better and easily
   understood as caesar shift but with different keys.  Its weakness is
   that it repeats (with period equal to key length) which means you can
   do Caesar shift frequency analysis (which works well with a fairly
   small amount of cipher text) on every nth character (where n is length
   of key).  So essentially decryption takes approx n^2 times as long and
   requires n times more text than caesar.
   NOTE: The way this builds on Caesar shift doesn't really have strong
         analogies to modern encryption.

3. Playfair cipher - encrypts with "block-size" two, i.e. pairs of letters
   are mapped to pairs of letters.  This illustrates an important property
   of modern cryptography: encrypt *blocks* of data.

4. Civil War - nice website on civil war ciphers

   *  http://cryptiana.web.fc2.com/code/civilwar0.htm

   Some use of vigenere and even caesar (confederate cipher wheels).  And
   different quasi-mechanical systems like the keyed rotating grill
   (http://cryptiana.web.fc2.com/code/civilwar6.htm).  interesting stuff,
   but doesn't necessarily have interesting analogies to modern-day crypto.
   Many (like rotating grill) rearrange the order of letters (or words)
   in the message rather than mapping letters to new letters.  This is
   also true of other historical ciphers like the greek cipher stick.


Ref's:
  https://interestingengineering.com/11-cryptographic-methods-that-marked-history-from-the-caesar-cipher-to-enigma-code-and-beyond
