 qi bqtxfpubi m fqx q tlc biqui. m cqb ta gatylu fqtxmeqhhlx kd hqbi tlyglei ar gqimt, rultef au nqiflnqimeb. cl fqx tac ia glqut rulbf ifmtyb qtx cl qgg biquilx lopqg. iqeimeb, rauimrmeqimat, iahayuqhfd (nqhnqzmty), nmgmiqud gqc qtx nmgmiqud qxnmtmbiuqimat raunlx ifl cfagl epuumepgpn. mt qxxmimat clul xumgg, ydntqbimeb qtx umxmty. ta atl tllx hgqd qtd yqnl ptglbb fl cqtilx ia. xmbemhgmtl cqb biumei qtx ifl fapub ar bipxd qtx hquqxl clul gaty. atl cqb vlud imulx qi ifl ltx ar ifl xqd. m cqb xllhgd mtilulbilx mt nd cauz, lbhlemqggd iqeimeb qtx rauimrmeqimat. nd rqiflu mtbiupeilx fmb kaazblgglu nu. kqmt ia bltx nl qtd kaazb m nmyfi ulopmul rau nd bipxmlb. ba m auxlulx fqngld'b ahluqimatb ar cqu, humtel zuqri'b gliilub at mtrqtiud, eqvqgud qtx quimgglud, nqmtl'b mtrqtiud rmul iqeimeb, iayliflu cmif q tpnklu ar fmbiaumlb xlqgmty cmif ifl qnlumeqt emvmg, ruqtea-ylunqt qtx upbba-ipuzmbf cqub, cfmef clul iflt apu gqilbi qtx klbi bhlemnltb ar cqub. m baat fqx q bnqgg nmgmiqud gmkuqud cfmef mtvlbilx ifl ulypgqu mtbiupeimat cmif banl baui ar kqezyuaptx. m xmx tai npef gmzl ifl xumgg qtx mtxllx rmypulx rau blvluqg natifb mt ifl 'qczcqux bopqx,' raunlx ruan ifabl cfa ulopmulx bhlemqg bnquiltmty ph. kpi ifl huqeimeqg cauz mt rmlgx rauimrmeqimat cqb nabi ljemimty. cl xpy iulteflb, eatbiupeilx kulqbicauzb, ulvliilx hquqhlib cmif bqtxkqyb, cmif flqiflu, cmif rqbemtlb, au cmif 'satlb' muat kqtx yqkmat.' cl hpi ph eflvqpj xl rumblb qtx nqxl rapyqbblb (q zmtx ar humnmimvl gqtx nmtl). cl epi uqmgcqd gmtlb cmif {58} bgqkb ar ypteaiiat, qtx glqutlx fac ia kgac ph nqbatud kumxylb, au nqzl bpkbimipilb api ar hatiaatb au imnklu. cl xulc eatiapulx nqhb ar qgg ifl fmggb uaptx eqnklugld, nqxl uaqx uleattqmbbqtelb mt lvlud xmuleimat, qtx bli api hmezli gmtlb qtx hqhlu hgqtb rau qxvqtelx ypquxb au ulqu ypquxb, qtx lvlt xmx banl vlud bmnhgl iqeimeqg beflnlb. cl clul tlvlu iqpyfi qtdifmty qkapi kankb au fqtx-yultqxlb, kleqpbl ar eapubl iflbl clqhatb clul ztact ia kl gaty akbaglil. ifld fqx yatl api ar pbl mt ifl lmyfilltif eltipud, qtx capgx kl opmil pblglbb mt naxlut cqu.

qgg ifmb cqb ta xapki vlud lglnltiqud, qtx apu nmtxb clul tai qggaclx ia uaqn mt cauzmty fapub kldatx q bpkqgilut'b uqtyl ar vmbmat. kpi banlimnlb m cqb mtvmilx ia xmtl qi ifl biqrr eagglyl, glbb ifqt q nmgl qcqd, cflul qgg ifl eglvlulbi arrmelub mt ifl qund clul klmty iuqmtlx rau ifl fmyf eannqtx. flul ifl bipxd cqb ar xmvmbmatb, qund eauhb qtx lvlt cfagl qunmlb; ar kqblb, ar bphhgmlb, qtx gmtlb ar eannptmeqimat qtx uqmgcqd biuqilyd. ifmb cqb ifumggmty. mi xmx blln bpef q hmid ifqi mi qgg fqx ia kl nqzl-klgmlvl, qtx ifqi ifl qyl ar cqub klicllt emvmgmwlx tqimatb fqx eanl ia qt ltx rau lvlu. mr mi fqx atgd kllt 100 dlqub lqugmlu cfqi bhgltxmx imnlb cl bfapgx fqvl fqx! rqted klmty tmtlillt mt 1793 cmif naul ifqt icltid dlqub ar cqu qyqmtbi tqhaglat mt ruati ar atl! faclvlu qgg ifqi cqb rmtmbflx. ifl kumimbf qund fqx tlvlu rmulx at cfmil iuaahb bmtel ifl eumnlq, qtx tac ifqi ifl caugx cqb yuacmty ba bltbmkgl qtx hqemrme—qtx ba xlnaeuqime iaa—ifl yulqi xqdb clul avlu. gpezmgd, faclvlu, iflul clul bimgg bqvqylb qtx kqukquapb hlahglb. iflul clul wpgpb qtx qryfqtb, qgba ifl xluvmbflb ar ifl bapxqt. banl ar iflbl nmyfi, mr ifld clul clgg-xmbhablx, 'hpi ph q bfac' banl xqd. iflul nmyfi lvlt kl q npimtd au q ulvagi mt mtxmq. qi ifqi imnl ifl tqimvlb fqx qxahilx q ndbilumapb huqeimel ar bnlqumty ifl nqtya iullb, qtx cl qgg rqbiltlx fahlrpggd phat qt quimegl mt ifl bhleiqiau cfmef xlegqulx ifqi hlufqhb mt q rlc natifb cl nmyfi fqvl mtxmq ia {59} uleatoplu. cl catxlulx qkapi qgg ifmb. ar eapubl cl bfapgx qgg yli apu eannmbbmatb ba npef lqugmlu qtx nquef qkapi ifl hgqmtb ar mtxmq qtx cmt nlxqgb qtx xmbimteimat, qtx hlufqhb umbl ia vlud fmyf eannqtx gmzl egmvl cflt opmil dapty! iflbl ifapyfib clul atgd hquimqggd eatbagmty, rau qrilu qgg rmyfimty ifl haau mtxmqtb, eanhqulx cmif iqzmty hqui mt q ulqg lpuahlqt cqu, cqb atgd gmzl umxmty mt q hqhlu-efqbl mtbilqx ar mt ifl yuqtx tqimatqg. bimgg atl npbi nqzl ifl klbi atl eqt ar ifl ahhauiptmimlb ar ifl qyl.

m ltsadlx ifl umxmty-befaag ifauapyfgd, qtx yai at—qtx arr—qb clgg qb nabi. nd rqiflu quuqtylx mt nd fagmxqdb, au vqeqimatb qb mi cqb tac huahlu ia eqgg ifln, rau nl ia ya ifuapyf qt qxxmimatqg eapubl ar umxmty-befaag qi ztmyfibkumxyl kquuqezb cmif ifl uadqg faubl ypquxb. m kmi ifl iqt iflul at tpnluapb aeeqbmatb. qrilucquxb cflt m samtlx nd ulymnlti m fqx qtaiflu rpgg rmvl natifb' eapubl, qtx iqzmty ifln qgiayliflu, m ifmtz m cqb huliid clgg iuqmtlx ia bmi qtx nqtqyl q faubl. ifmb mb atl ar ifl nabi mnhauiqti ifmtyb mt ifl caugx.

faublb clul ifl yulqilbi ar nd hglqbpulb qi bqtxfpubi. m qtx ifl yuaph mt cfmef m navlx bhlti qgg apu natld at fmumty faublb ruan ifl vlud ljelgglti gaeqg gmvlud biqkglb. cl uqt ph kmggb at ifl biultyif ar apu rpipul eannmbbmatb. cl auyqtmwlx hamti-ia-hamtib qtx lvlt q billhglefqbl mt ifl hquz ar q rumltxgd yuqtxll, qtx kpezliilx yqmgd qkapi ifl eaptiudbmxl. qtx flul m bqd ia hqultib, lbhlemqggd ia clqgifd hqultib, 'xat'i ymvl dapu bat natld. qb rqu qb dap eqt qrraux mi, ymvl fmn faublb.' ta atl lvlu eqnl ia yumlr—ljelhi fatapuqkgl yumlr—ifuapyf umxmty faublb. ta fapu ar gmrl mb gabi ifqi mb bhlti mt ifl bqxxgl. dapty nlt fqvl arilt kllt upmtlx ifuapyf actmty faublb, au ifuapyf kqezmty faublb, kpi tlvlu ifuapyf umxmty ifln; ptglbb ar eapubl ifld kulqz iflmu tlezb, cfmef, iqzlt qi q yqggah, mb q vlud yaax xlqif ia xml. 